Perfect.
Laudable.
Perfect. Perfect. Perfect. I'm
just sharing my screen. Just do
let me know once you can start
seeing the screen.
Yes, Sir. I can see your screen
and stood. Yeah. And student,
Perfect.
you can also acknowledge in
between, OK.
Ah yes, and student you can stop
me whenever you are unable to.
Who I listen to my voice. Or you
can just chat. Or you can put in
the chat if you want to convey
anything or you can unmute
yourself and speak. So please
feel free to do so, yeah.
OK. And Anand Sir like as per
scheduled time, I'm having hard
stop at 3:30. I mean though we
have started half an hour late,
OK.
I cannot extend by half an hour
because like you know I got into
another meeting at 3:30. So
we'll stop at 3:30 and like you
Yeah. Yeah, no.
know in the next lecture I will
cover or tomorrow's the lecture
Yeah, no.
I will extend my half an hour or
whatever we have lost today.
Yeah. No, no issues, Sir.
Tomorrow also, Sir. Is it OK
Yeah, yeah.
now? 9 to 11 in the morning.
Yes, 9 to 11 is OK with me and
student. After 11 you don't put
anything because I might extend
by one hour because we have lost
two days time, right? So don't
keep anything till 12:00.
O'clock for this student then.
Yes, Sir.
Or or they have or are these
students have already have any
other call at 11? Is there
anything already scheduled?
No, Sir. I think tomorrow is
second Saturday Day of holiday.
So that's why I'm keeping and.
Huh. So then I can exchange.
Yeah. So whatever they have lost
Yeah.
today, I will compromise. Like,
you know, I can accommodate it
Yeah.
tomorrow. OK.
And so, because of that, sorry
to interrupt, because of that
Thank you.
reason only I'm recording the
session actually actually more
Yeah, yeah, yeah. OK.
than 70 student opted and right
now 50 attendees are there. So
OK. OK. OK.
if some student wants to go
through, they can go through.
Perfect. Perfect. Sure. Thank
you. Thanks. Thanks you very
OK, Sir, over to you.
much. OK. So students, the topic
is queuing models as you know,
the queuing theory as a part of
operation research. We are going
to study this. This subject is
very much applicable in all your
areas. You are from mechanical
background. This is a mechanical
77 if.
I know correctly. Is this a make
batch?
Further now nowadays it is
interdisciplinary course, so.
OK, OK. So the students are from
which team?
That's all. We have five
branches. So students are from 5
branches. Sir, I take computer
mechanically, XD and electrical.
OK.
Perfect. Perfect. Perfect. OK.
So for all the then I will give
examples from all the
perspective like I thought that
this is a make brand. So I was
thinking of giving only
automobile examples. But let's
give the hypothetical general
examples. So queueing model,
what is the queuing model and
where it is getting used? So as
I said earlier, this is a
applied subject applied subject
means what this particular topic
which you are going to study
today.
This is very much applicable you
people say, right that we have
learned trigonometry or
something in mechanics trust or
traces or whatever. I mean,
whatever topics or whatever
domains you have studied in
particular topics or particular
subject.
You may ask this question to
yourself that very this is
getting used.
In market, is there anywhere are
we going to use derivative or
trigonometry or integration
whatever kind of maps we are
studying?
What are the applied?
Applications of it. What does it
mean? Is this thing what we are
learning in our syllabus? Is it
going to get used at all
anywhere in our practical life?
So this might be the question
comes in your mind. So the
answer for queuing theory is.
Whatever you are going to study
under this subject, this
operational research, this is
applicable in all the fields,
whether you go to finance,
computer development, any stack
development, Java development.
Uh, any cybersecurity
techniques, networking, or if
you want to set up the call
center or the BQ Center or the
KPO or hospital or demark or Big
bazaar kind of thing, anything
or some of you might go as a
broadcaster in a cricket match.
Or you must be working in media.
You name the application and
this concept is going to get
used. What is this concept?
The concept is queueing theory
is a collection of mathematical
model of various queuing
systems. So what is the cube?
The literal meaning of cute the
literal English meaning of cute.
Is like, you know, the people
are standing in a row.
Ohh.
Now this is a queue.
Consider this as a.
I'm chunk of people.
Was in one person, two person
three, person 4.
Just sending in a queue.
And they are waiting for work.
Suppose it's a cashier or, say,
medical facility or getting
vaccination vaccination center.
I hope you can see my pain
screen as well. This paint brush
which I have open.
Yes, Sir. Yes, Sir.
Yes. Yeah, perfect.
So this is a queue.
Yeah.
Let's name this queue.
What is what we can name this
as. Let's name this as a LQ.
The standing in a railway ticket
line, Metro ticket line or BST
line you called it dequeue
something like, you know, first
crack. You had medical
vaccination that you have. So
let's name this queue as a LQ.
And I'm giving this terminology
which will be used in exams as
well. OK, so I'm not just
hypothetically calling his as a
LQ.
Uh, when you try to draw it,
make sure you're writing the
same letters, which I'm.
Writing here.
So LQ.
Thank you. Is a cutie OK?
And this vaccination center?
Is called as a system.
You have.
Approach any vaccination center
to get vaccine. This is a
COVID-19 center.
So you must be knowing or you
must have seen now Lal Bagh
Karaja Q on the TV.
The person goes within one
second. The security push you
away, and then why they're
pushing you away because they
are in hurry. They're hurry.
They're in hurry to get rid of
this queue because there are
millions of people who are
standing in a queue for a
Lalbagh saraju darshan. And
that's the reason you must have
seen. They have just like you
know.
Take your head.
Are we? Look, I see there. I
mean, you know, they themselves.
Uh, bang, your head literally
back. I mean, it's not even
like, you know, they are doing
some soft action or something
like that, then literally
banging your head on a fleet of
Lord Ganesha and then push you
away. Why? Because they don't
want to.
Make you stand there more than
one second.
OK. Why? If you stand there
like, you know, if you are
praying, say for more than one
minute or two minutes and if
there are millions of people in
a queue, 1,000,000 means what 10
Lac?
I've seen like people and.
Or 10,00,000 people if each.
Person.
Is going to take 5 minutes for
praying. How much time is going
to get like you know?
For that entire queue to get
finished.
It's uh, I'm talking about 5
minutes, so this is like more
than 50,00,000 minutes. I'm
talking about it 50,00,000
minutes means it's like much
beyond your day.
Yeah. Yeah, that's city.
Much beyond the 24 hours.
So in order to get.
The queue moving, we should make
sure that how much should the
waiting time here? What should
be the waiting time?
This is the concept of queue
theory. What is the waiting time
so lalma the Raja?
Lalbaugcha Raja there
volunteers, they have decided.
That decided only one Raja only
one feet, I said in Acusado
feet.
Tagalog hair have to defeat me 8
feet. Me either gay. If you must
have seen any or temple say you
are staying in Mumbai. If you
would have visit any temples say
X temple so.
You your time like.
So if you go to Shirdi or
Siddhivinayak.
So.
The way you goes there is.
And then is not OK.
Once you goes from here.
James.
Ladies goes from here.
Or just go.
Socially, and I will you Turkey.
So there are actually three
queues. Miss 3 servers are
there. 3 servers means all.
This person or this queue is
serving is serving one type of
version. This queue is serving
another type of version. This
third queue serving another type
of version. So number of servers
are three here.
Number of servers.
Or three.
So this is a hypothetical
example of uh temple. Now
consider this when you go for
the COVID vaccination center,
there are three doctors who are
sitting here.
Three doctors means at a time.
You can get vaccine.
From two different people.
But do you want to get vaccine
from three different people? No.
At a time. You want Maxine from
only one person, right?
You want vaccine from only one
person, so this one queue will
go here.
There's another queue or this
first two person.
They will go in this view.
Next person.
We'll go this view.
This four person.
You going this year?
So you had a concept, Sanjay,
this very easy concept of you.
How many number of servers?
You are going to serve in the
queue.
So this is called the server
one.
Uh, you can consider this as a
computer server or as a literal
meaning of English. The person
who is serving is a server.
Server 2.
These guys are worth 3.
They are serving.
Three different set of person at
the same time, or three
different queues. They are going
to serve.
So this is a concept.
Now, why we are learning this
queueing theory? So we are
learning to find out the cost
offering to the service to find
out the cost incurred due to
delay in service to allocate the
resources. So these three are
the needs.
If you weren't sometime.
I don't know you people are
taking screenshot or you need a
time to write. If you need a
time to write just write this
down like during your exam.
This might be the question, like
actually the mathematical
questions comes. I will give you
enough time to write that but
need to learn queueing theory
this concept this last three
lines we should write down.
Why you are studying this?
What's this going to be used in
industry so when you go for the
job, your boss is say you set up
a call Center for me when you're
setting up a call center. I
know. Suppose you're setting up
the call Center for the
Vodafone. There are 10,000
people are going to call on one
number. Are they going to stand
in a queue for one hour? No.
The gain to get served.
So while getting served, how
many call center agents you
should put up?
So this all we are going to see,
this is all the purpose of it.
Yeah, I will just give you 2
minutes. Just write this down.
Yeah, I hope it's done and I
will tell you I will go in the
reverse way. Whatever is a
important from the exam
perspective.
In exam they are not going to
ask you what will be the
advantage of queuing theory and
all they're going to give you
some mathematical models and
mathematical problems.
So how to solve those problems
that I'm going to teach you? I'm
going to make you confident in
that, but before solving the
problem, you should know the
concept. You should understand
the question and for
understanding the question, I'm
telling you all these things.
So these are the characteristic
queen length length I have
already.
Uh, explain you.
There is something called as
arrivals. If you see in this
diagram.
Uh, you can consider this person
is getting vaccine.
Take the service.
There's a waiting line. Waiting
line means what?
And the person who are waiting
my number.
Uh to get so.
That is going to call as a
waiting line.
And what is the waiting time in
the queue? So how much time I
should wait in the queue? All
these calculations we are going
to see with the help of 1
mathematical example. But before
mathematical example I want you
to get familiar few terms.
So there are various patterns
arriving pattern what is
arriving pattern.
So for example, you are starting
your staying at Vashi.
And considering Vashi, there is
only one train after every
interval of one hour.
Nowadays, if you go to Vashi
railway station, there is a
train after every five to 10
minutes, but five to seven years
back. If you go to Vashi and if
you want to catch a train at
Thani, there was a train timing,
there was a train at 4:00 PM and
there is a train at.
Uh, 6:00 PM and then there was a
trainer.
Cool.
Do you enter Vashi station at
4:30 PM?
Are 4-5, it's 4-5 PM.
Don't you know your college has
lecture time till 4?
And now you need to catch a
train, but you know.
That till 6:00 PM, there is a no
train. So what are you going to
do? Are you going to enter into
the railway station premises and
going to wait there for two
hours?
Are you going to do that? No.
What will you prefer? You will
go to Inorbit mall.
To retrain should neglect Hogan
Tire.
Let me go to Inorbit mall and
spend some time there and where
time I'm going to enter. Am I
going to enter here at 6:00 PM?
No, I'm going to enter here,
here at 5:55. Fifty three
mornings.
Consider hypothetical example
where.
Who that was. She went there
except Father Agnel College.
Why she got offices, travelers,
sub sub sub father-in-law
college.
So in that case.
This railway station 1/2.
Calculate the pattern that at
what time the students will
come.
So this pattern they have
observed that.
College lecture time is 4:00 PM,
but all the students who will
enter now will be 6:00 PM and.
There are hardly any students
who will wait till 8:00 PM.
Only the students who will opt
to go for a movie to walk to go
for three hours, Spain something
years time or dinner time so.
The railway station. What are
they going to calculate? They
know that at 4:00 PM, If lecture
is going to get over, these
people are going to Spain, some
two hours or like, you know, one
hour and 50 minutes somewhere.
And they are going to enter in
the Vashi premises in the Vashi
railway station premises only at
5:50 PM onward.
After 6:00 PM, so no one is
going to enter because they know
the train Shivaji should. There
are some people who might want
to take a chance in late who I
have, but let's not go into
those like, you know,
hypothetical examples. If train
will be late or not.
Let's take example. The trains
are going or the departing at
the correct interval.
In that scenario, this railway
station is going to calculate
what is the pattern, what is the
arrival pattern of the students
and the Vashi railway station.
So this is what the arrival
pattern is.
Or the mall guys. Uh, see
inorbit mall.
They want to set up some.
You know, once you enter into
the mall, there is some discount
coupons or some guitar is
sitting there or something very
sitting there. They have set up
the stage. They're setting this
up only on Saturday, Sunday or
only on the weekends on on only
on Friday evening.
Monday through Thursday, if you
see the entire mall is empty. So
for that time they are not going
to set up anything. Why? Because
they have studied the living
patterns, this arriving pattern.
What is the pattern? They know
arriving pattern is something
like we know the capacity of the
customer or the behavioral
pattern of the customer.
So they know customer comes only
in the evening.
Of Friday evening or Saturday
evening or Saturday, full day
and Sunday. Full day. Why?
Because it's the weekend.
All of these Diwali holiday or
Ganpati holiday, so we are
expecting some customer to come.
And that's the reason they come
up with some extra offers on
that day or the food court will
stop some extra food on that
day. So what they are or what
what they want to gauge or what
they want to speculate the
arrival pattern.
If you know you want doctors,
they are asking the patients
they're giving.
Appointments prior a one day
prior or two day prior. Why?
Because they want to control the
inflow.
They want to control the inflow
because doctors having capacity
of examining only 50 patients
per day.
Now beyond 50%, yeah, beyond 50
people if.
Any patient arrives unless and
until C emergency, so they are
giving some buffer time.
And the doctor knows that for
serving one patient, I need 15
to 20 minutes.
I need number of patients
increase more than 50.
Then Doctor won't get time to go
home. Doctor Who? There is one
hour day of your hospital
medicine setting.
That's the reason then Doctor
has come out with the idea of
appointment.
Take that one.
Take the prior of 1. Why?
Because they want to.
Manage this arrival factory,
this arriving pattern. They want
to manage, OK.
No, there's a queue discipline.
What is QTC being? You sitting
like you go one go one by one or
go one after one.
Serving facility.
Like after taking vaccine, they
ask you to wait for 30 minutes.
If there are some side effects,
then they should know what are
the side effects.
So they ask you to wait for 30
minutes.
So for giving injection they
will take one minute to refill
that injection, give the
injection and then they will ask
you to go and sit on that
particular chair, wait for half
an hour or one hour. We are
going to observe you. So per
patient service translatability
or the waiting time is one hour.
They've done some definitions.
The definitions we will come
later.
Because they don't. I mean,
they're not going to assume they
finished, but you should know
definition.
So there is some queue
discipline. It is the average
rate at which customer arrive.
This is called as arriving
pattern.
What is QCP? It is a common
method of choosing the customer
for service among those waiting
for the service.
First come first. So so whoever
is coming first, we are going to
solve you first.
What is serving facility?
Examining the number of
customers served at a time and
the statistical pattern of time
taken for the service. What is
the service here? Putting the
injection, putting the vaccine,
putting the vaccine one minute
for asking where customer to
wait is a one hour.
What is the entire, uh total
service time total service time
is 1 hour plus one minute.
Means 61 minutes.
Is the service tree.
Now.
Let's go directly.
There is some theory which you
should know, but let's directly
go to questions so that you will
understand.
Uh. From exam perspective. Oh,
what is the important? And then
I'm going to come in a reverse
way that whatever things you
have studied, why you have
studied that and you will also
understand why it's solving this
problem.
So there are few denominations
or few patterns or few.
Thanks which you need to
remember.
Arrival rate.
He can't make it make customer.
He can take it. Nair patient
side within one hour, huh?
OK, now the unit you must you
are all engineering student
science student.
Since last four years or your
12th, 11th and 12, two years
plus 4/2 plus four six years.
You know what is the importance
of unit? You cannot calculate
the mathematical problem by
taking one unit in 2 meter and
one in two kilometer.
So if you want to multiply 2
things if.
This is into kilometer.
And if you want to calculate
anything, what is the other
factor you are going to majoring
kilometer only?
So the unit should be common.
This is Alicia.
This should be com.
So unit should be common. So
whatever calculations we are
going to do.
They are going to either in our.
Armani.
To make sure.
And we are dealing with two
different variables. There is a
one variable A and variable B.
So if you're measuring variable
in R.
Make sure you're measuring very
well. Be also in our only.
This is a common thing you want,
since last six years you're
studying maths, so this will be
normal practice.
So arrival rate, what is the
arrival rate here?
We never customers arise in the
queue for getting served in the
hospital or getting.
Vaccinated or they want to.
Watch a movie so there is a
fixed pattern.
I have given you example of
train in this similar way. If
there is a Showtime at 6:00
o'clock you arrive at 5:30, you
don't go in theaters one hour
prior or two hours prior.
And listen until you have some
other plans to eat something
before going to theater. Occam's
both men. Yeah. Correct. So,
instead of spending ₹500 for
popcorn bucket.
Let's go eat something in the
food court.
And then sit for the movie.
Yeah.
So arrival rate.
Just usual Thompson arrival
trip. Esco yadana.
Just write this down arrival
rate a signifies delta or
Lambda.
Not whatever you call this inner
Roman. You call this as a
Lambda, right?
It's a great sign.
So this Lambda.
You are going to notify for the
arrival rate, so H is the
agniratha. Whenever you see this
term arrival.
Arrival.
It's the other arrival, a.
Lambda.
The Audrey, whenever you're
talking about arrival, you talk
about Lambda.
No in problem statement. If you
think the rate at which customer
are coming to get the services.
Our customers are arriving.
The number of custom arrived to
avail services in what given
amount of time.
What is the major? What is it?
You need two major this.
Customer kidney time. May I what
is the average rate? So
customers are arriving at every
6 minutes.
The system akshata arriving gate
every 6 minutes.
Problem is here exam.
Mr Manara arriving every six
mini.
One army could tangle. One arm
is 60 minutes.
You right.
The unit work which we have
calculated here is minutes.
What is the average arrival
rate?
In one hour I arrival it is 10,
Lambda is 10 OK.
So keep this thing in mind or
you can write this as a line
arrival of customer.
After six minutes, one customer
is coming, so after 60 minutes,
how many people will come in?
Yeah.
No average expected mean service
rate to inject.
To inject an injection how much
time I'm taking, I need to clean
your hand with spirit.
I need to refill the bottle or
sorry, I need to refill
injection from the bottle.
I want to put a cotton. I will
ask you to please like you know,
take your T-shirt slightly up so
that I can get access. I can see
your arm.
In order to like you know.
The doctor will ask you, right?
Pushblock push yourselves up.
And then they are going to put
up the spirit.
And after putting up this
spirit, they will inject after
injection injecting what again
they are doing. They are again
putting the cotton so that blood
shouldn't come out for that
interprocess. How much time, how
much time it takes.
It takes 5 minutes.
Alright.
It's 5 minutes.
However, we server here.
On average, the server takes 5
minutes. The doctor is taking 5
minutes to service customer.
Calculate the average service
rate for one hour.
Dignaga, where are we? I again
told you 60 minutes so.
When Faiza, 60, so like one
hour, is equal to 60 minute.
It's a seeming to be ready to
fight 512.
What is the menu?
MU is the service rate. What is
the service rate?
So you may want to write this
down. Service rate is the rate
at which customers are serviced
by the service provider.
And calculate the average
service rate. What is the
average height?
I'm not gonna go to. You can
tell me. But love. 16 minutes.
Maybe he is going to serve 12
people. So the average service
rate MU is 12 average arrival
rate Lambda is 10. You have to
accept or something. Everyone
got this very easy. Just and
signifying. One Lambda and one
MU. One notation. I'm signifying
to measure the arrival rate of
the customer and the rate at
which my customer is getting
served.
Everyone is with me. He'll here.
Everyone understood this easy
concept and I'm going very slow.
Just let me know if I'm going
very slow or this is an average
speed or I'm going. Am I going
too fast?
Everyone is getting this, yes,
no.
You can reply in chat box also.
Are you guys with me? Am I
audible?
Are you listening to my
lectures?
Hello.
Am I audible guys?
Yes, Sir. You are audible Anand
yourself.
Yeah, OK. OK, perfect, perfect.
Just reply me. I said me reply
call because we are on virtual
world. I don't know if my net
Internet connectivity is gone
or.
So.
I tell you, just tell audible
for yak. Sanjay. I mean, you can
respond.
Have you understood?
I have you understood the
concept which I'm trying to
teach you till here. Have you
understood till here?
Yes. No.
Or am I going too fast?
Suppose.
Yeah, alright. There may like
what I'm trying to convey you or
what I'm trying to teach you.
Yes, Sir. Yes.
Yeah. Thank you.
Respond cartero. I mean, I don't
know what is a pattern.
Students, teachers, relationship
or pattern, whether your
teachers, whether you're regular
teachers, are asking you these
questions intermittently or not
like you know we are not full
time teachers, right? So we need
some kind of responses so that
you know that you are with us.
OK.
So let's calculate row. This is
called as row or R.
Your filiation rate we call this
as a utilization rate. You can
signify this with.
Row.
Or are row this guy say Ruby
Voltaire RB OK.
So R is a utilization rate. So
what is my utilization rate?
My utilization rate is Lambda
upon you.
So in previous example, what
Lambda we have seen 10 and what
is the menu?
Glenn, so 10 by 12 is .833, so
just write this down. I'm giving
you one minute. This is the RR
is average arrival rate divided
by average service rate.
And this is Lambda divided by MU
which is 10 / 12.
Thing is, the rate at which my
customer arrives.
Well.
Is the minutes at which I'm
serving.
Mine particular patient.
In one hour to April, when our
calculation.
So .83 three is the utilization
rate. So if I want to calculate.
Doctor Kobichi Khana khana.
So .833%, this doctor is going
to stay busy.
So Doctor will be busy.
For how much time?
So you go .83.
First thing, he's going to be
busy.
And then what will be idle for
how much time he is not doing
anything.
So agari apni, so 83% like, you
know for 83%.
This doctor is going to stay
busy. That means Doctor will be
idle for how much time.
1.
Doctor will be ideal for 17%,
right?
17% of time.
This person is going to stay
idle. She's like formula. We
have. Why? Because this I have
to. I have to. Just one round of
figure. But in exam you cannot
write the round of figure. So 1
-. R is the formula. What does
it mean 1 -. R time is going to
sit. I will 1 -. R.
1 -, R.
Is that it will to 1 -, 0.833.
Let me for zero point.
17.
Sorry.
Zero point.
1 minus.
0.833.
It is 01167.
0.167 times I will be idle that
comes to around 16.7%.
But there is a formula also for
doing this.
Yeah. So there's a probability
we call it as a probability. So
what is the probability?
Whatever formulas I'm giving
just right is down. This is the
probability PO.
We did not. We signify this with
the PO. So what is PO? PO is 1
-. R.
1 minus that utilization factor.
So what is 1 minor?
Archana formula we have seen
Aries Lambda Yu.
Meal.
So how do you solve this?
New minus Lambda by MU.
Some new goodnight 12 Lambda
Goodnight 10.
Lambda is 10 -, 12.
So 12 -, 10 / 12, nine.
1 by 6.
So when they six is how much?
0.1667 OK.
So we have went into other way
around to calculate this.
0.1667.
OK.
With that answer.
This is the probability when
cashier is idle, cashier or
doctors are idle. So what is
this? This figure signifies this
is called as probability
probability of what probability
for which my doctor will be I
will.
Are you lost where we are going
to use this? I will come. Come
to it.
I will complete why exactly you
need this and where exactly you
are going to.
Movies.
No mu and Lambda. I hope you
have written this now after MU
and Lambda there are very first.
I have told you about what the
which is called as LQ.
What is the QLQ? Is the length
of Q? Suppose is a doctor and
outside I'm putting a queue.
I put this skew.
Now.
Entire hue.
Q Are you happy LQ him?
Donald colors are not getting
selected here. It works the
queue Hannah, the Q4 Q the Q for
Queen of Analysis, Q for Q.
If you have OK.
Now this Q we are going to call
it as a Q.
Your hair is cute. OK, now, if
I'm considering the waiting time
of these people, I'm going to
call this as well Q. But if I'm
also going to calculate.
The waiting time you see me?
Karen, that I asked this
evening.
Once they entered into the
system.
From here.
Did he get entered into the
system? Is winters into the
doctor's Kevin? Once I enter
here, I have become a part of
system. OK, I have become a part
of 16 and now.
If I want to calculate everyone.
The person who have already 2
cracks in the person who is
sitting idle after taking walks
in, who has been kept under
monitoring.
If I want to calculate
everyone's time then I'm going
to call it as a.
LS.
I'm going to call it as well.
And it's.
Yeah, Rohit.
Yeah.
LS smallest.
So this terminology everyone
understood if I am serving this
queue before I'm getting
service.
I'm standing here for service,
right?
Would you want Milagai line
vote? You must be doing this on
petrol, right?
Plus, you're putting yourself in
a queue. That time I'm going to
call you as a LQ person.
But he's really cute.
He's not got served. He can
leave the line anytime, right?
So once he leave the time that
person doesn't like, you know,
make any sense to me.
So.
This is my cue.
Due to the time I'm getting
served.
Once I'm getting served or once
I've got served then.
I will become part of their
team.
But you shouldn't forget
Kiandra.
Keep on that. Right. I was
getting. So you shouldn't forget
that.
I quickly goes to them.
Occupy league vaccine.
To include.
Maybe when you say in your real
hair I won't dare data as well.
So how I'm going to get there
later?
If I want to calculate LS.
If I'm going to talk about the
list, if I'm going to think
about Alex, and if I'm going to
calculate this, then I must
consider the people who are
getting served as well.
Otherwise they'll kill them.
Yeah. Otherwise I'll kiss, you
know.
Now there are.
So.
Some conditions.
Which you do manage. What kind
of conditions?
Lambda can be greater than me.
Lambda is what arrival rate.
This is greater than one given
you example of this.
Lalbaugcha Raja.
Lot of Lambda, lot of arrival
rate.
Enter night, people keep on
coming entire night. Took the
only early morning.
3:00 AM or something like that.
People go to sleep and train
doesn't work. Train doesn't
train or group versus doesn't
operate in that time slot.
Only during that time slot the.
Arrival rate comes lower down. I
mean, the people arriving at the
pandal.
Of that lalbaugcha Raja, they
getting reduced only when.
There are no train when there
are no words and when it's early
morning time or midnight.
So that time.
Delta.
Is less than me.
Otherwise, people come and go as
small small mandap a small
Punjab.
Small roadside tandale there is
no one in pandal. People go.
They don't even have to park
their vehicle.
They just come.
Stop there in front of pandal.
They pray to God they go. So
Lambda is equal to move. If
suppose arrival rate is 10.
And serving ready stain.
Then 10 by 10, one highest
efficiency and no input divided
by output is equal to 1 hi-fi
high fidelity.
High efficiency.
This is called as utilization,
right?
Now I didn't. I have already
told you. I'm I'm. I'm not sure
whether you're going to get this
notes or not, but this is the
same concept which I have tried
to explain you in paint it's a 1
-, R.
It's 1 -, R what is R
utilization rate? What is
utilization rate? Is 0.833 so
idle time? How I'm going to
calculate idle time?
I'm going to calculate idle
time.
After deducting the utilization
rate from 1 -, R.
And we have already seen this
examples 1 minus delta YMU.
Please write this down
probability of 0 or probability
of no customer.
That means idle wait.
So ideally it is what?
Is ZERO, 1 -, R.
Or 1 minus home or room.
And provability for one
customers.
We've built up by new into 1
minus. Delta by is the
probability of one person.
Just write this down.
I'm giving you one minute for
writing.
Hope is done.
And this is how we put
probability for two customers.
I didn't. Two aren't 2P0.
Into our into our into 1 minus,
huh? So delta by MU into delta
by me into 1 minus delta by.
So this is a probability.
2 into 2 -, 1 factorial.
He was doing this.
Since so simple mathematics.
I haven't taken me your all
lectures, so I don't know
whether you have learned this
probability or not.
I hope you have learned this, so
this is how you calculate the.
Just write this formula and then
we will go to solving the.
Sir, you are on mute.
Ohh sorry yeah I was in. I was
going on talking, OK.
OK.
Yeah. So what I was talking.
And the airline. Suppose there
is one airline com air.
It has one of the reservation,
the person who do your
reservation, the person who
issue you tickets or issue you
boarding pass.
So we have already seen what is
the arrival rate, what is the
arrival rate.
Arrival rate is the rate at
which customers are coming to
get the services right.
So what is my arrival rate here?
My arrival rate here is 8.
What are?
Why?
Because 8 customers are coming
in an hour.
During peak time there might be
huge queue but average 8 per
hour in a Poisson distribution
method. Let me know in the chat
whether you have studied because
I've already spoke about this
like I was in mute.
So now Poisson distribution. I
don't want to repeat it again.
I'll just let me know if you
have studied this before or not
for solving the problem at this
particular point. I don't want
to confuse you with much more
technical terms, but if I know
you like you are at the say say
one thing, you must be knowing
what is a Poisson distribution.
So just consider that arrival
rate or the arriving the number
of customers who are arriving,
those are 8.
Words are, and the reservation
clerk serving those customers in
six minutes on an average, yeah.
So average, what is the time
which they are taking it 6
minute?
OK.
Six is the minute. What is Mu Mu
is 6 minute.
What is the probability that
system is busy? What is the
average time for customers spend
in the system and what is the
average length of the queue and
what is the number of customers
in the system?
So I've told you during. I mean
while solving the first problem,
the unit should be same.
So now we are talking here 8 per
hour, 8 per hour. This is a 6
minute on an average, so six per
hour means 6 per 60 minutes.
What is the MU MU will come and
stay?
6 minutes right? 6 minutes.
No 6 by 60.
Yes.
No. What are the things I which
I want to calculate?
Things I want to calculate.
Are.
The length of the queue.
The length of the system.
Number of customers in this
system.
Time spent in the system and
what is the probability?
Yeah. So we have seen in this
particular problem.
In this particular problem.
Lambda.
Is 8.
New.
If Spain.
Right then.
6 minutes for customer.
So 6 minutes for an hour, 6 by
60, Sir. Sorry per hour, 60 by 6
is the 10.
So so for our is MU is 10 and
arriving is Lambda is 8. I've
given you a simple simple tree.
A is arrival a looks like Lambda
is 8.
Now let's see the utilization
factor utilization factor. What
is the formula you must have
written?
Uh.
Are we denote it with row?
So you feel lization factor is
Lambda by MU.
Or is the Lambda here?
Lambda was eight.
MU was 10.
So utilization factories, .8
means the.
Chicken Guy chicken guy means
the airport customer, the
airport staff.
He is busy 80% of time.
80% of time he is busy. That
means for how much time is idle.
He is idle only for .2 times.
1 -, .8.
For two.
.2.
Or.
80%.
Minus 100.
How much is?
It's 20%.
So utilization factor.
If.
0.8.
Now let's see average.
Number of customers in a queue.
But the number of customers is
what?
I've already told number of
customers.
It's a list.
Consider that LS this is a
number of customer.
Time spent in the system time.
Let's denote it with W.
On which time I'm spending in
the system, I will call it as a
W.
Now.
Average number of customers in a
queue LS.
How I'm going to calculate the
list?
I'm going to calculate LS with
this formula.
The list is equal to Lambda.
Upon.
New minus Lambda. Just write
down this formula.
Ellis is the number of system.
Uh, sorry. Number of customers
in the system.
Ellis.
Lambda divided by MU by Lambda.
So whatever the Lambda Lambda
value was it.
Meanwhile, Louis, 10.
So 8 / 2 is 4.
So this is the average number of
customers standing in a queue.
OK.
Average number of customer.
I said not QS do not exist in
these are average number of.
What is standing in the system?
So this is a formula for that.
With this particular example, I
am going to give you fair idea
of what queuing model is and
what are the type of questions
comes in exam. So you should
confident enough to solve this
problem. So you need to buy hard
few formula.
Once you buy had the formula you
will able to.
Solve this problem 10 marks.
No. What is the average number
of customers in a queue? We have
seen QL QL Q before serving to
the system before entering into
the doctor's cabin for getting
vaccinated.
On forgetting examined, this is
a LQ. So what is the formula for
LQ, LQ is LS.
The left.
Into.
Lambda by MU.
That means a less into
utilization factor.
Lambda VM is what R right Lambda
by MU.
Are.
What is the leasing to us?
What is the least we have
calculated 4?
And four into .8.
32.
3.2.
So average number of customers
who are there in the queue.
While entering into the doctor's
giving, those are three-point 2.
Average number of customer
including this who are getting
served is a fool.
I hope you have some Proclear
everyone understood till here.
El QNS.
Q length of the queue.
Q.
Cute. You know, five uh, what it
denotes.
You.
S system.
So could you be hardening to buy
hard disk?
This is only one important form
formula.
Ellis.
Or two.
Lambda by MU minus Lambda.
This is only important form
formula and LQ, LQ, what LSE do?
Uh.
This is the simple formula.
Average number of customers
standing in a queue.
Yeah, that's of course.
Now average time. Now we'll talk
about length. What about time?
I wish time for the people.
Or the customers or the
patients.
Who are spending time?
What is that formula? The
formula for that is waiting
time, so waiting time for WC
yadaki waiting time waiting
whenever you see the world
waiting in the question.
Waiting.
W4 waiting.
Never received W there is a one
formula of.
1.
Upon.
Right.
1.
Meal.
Minus.
Didn't.
New Archana book Medicover,
Fitnah news.
Then or does that?
It.
So one way 2.
Morning 5.
The point where is the what WS?
What is the WS time customer
spains in the entire system?
I need now and watch out of you,
Deepa.
The offer doctoral dispensary.
Jacob. Doctor Killough Bahar
Khade Hai El Kumar.
This made today.
LQ.
Doctor Deepa, Sandra, Vijay,
which patient has the reason
they are waiting outside?
Doctor is not sitting idle. I
Sunil kaiseki dispensary
birthday.
The doctor idol with her doctor
is working, so Doctor case
Amnesia patient beta.
This will be time consuming.
Otherwise, I've told without
Doctor Key timeline Bologi see I
have passed on 100 customer
within 50 minutes.
Or 200 minutes, though minute
may customer though minute make
patient.
But if Doctor is sitting there
then.
There is going to examine the
warping time as a factor we have
may consider karmachari.
Previously we saw kilometer
meter.
Units may ours and minute.
Like that time time is the unit
which we need to consider.
So it's OK.
What answers we got, what the
probability that the system is
busy.
System is busy for.
80% time that means.
.8.
80% of the same system is busy
and what is the average time a
customer spend in this stage?
This means we wanted WS.
What is the WS?
The Harvey and upon.
New minus delta.
And which comes 70.5?
So this is 0.5 minute or 0.5
hours.
Is the time customer spent in
the system. Whatever you need
you want to.
Used for the calculation.
Probabilities .80, point 8.
Now third, what is the average
length of the cube?
Length of the queues work.
LQ.
Number of customers LS.
In this system Jeff System, I
got the wayside. Yeah.
Still here, everyone is clear.
Last 15 minutes remaining.
Anyone have any question?
Let's go for one more problem.
You will understand it better.
Are you in the market? Has a
single cashier. You must have
gone to demark.
Or after some Diego cashier
counterfeit kitten. Now
beautiful.
One person quite carrying whole
lot of the trolley more than
7280 items.
7280 items we are like you know,
we have to get it built.
Easily counter Nikola. If you
are having uh less than 10
items, please come in. Come and
stand in this room.
Because they want to work very
first. Very first page I asked
you to write those theory lines.
Undue delay you need to avoid
delay.
You need to give better service.
Customer will come for shopping
us make itna so those.
But was told me how much time he
has spent.
Humid.
Looking thing Bhattacharyya is
that ₹100 work is that ₹100
saving his work.
Against those three hours.
Oculus Justice come items in
come we have having different.
Ohh.
Counter for you.
For less than I at 10 items.
There is a different counters.
And.
If I'm going to run the
operations.
I should know how many number of
counters I should put up.
How many number of if I want to
put a 50 counters then is it
feasible is a Queenie which
everyone is happy.
What do you need to think?
Business first. There are
options I can put up 100
cashiers. Mix it there.
100 people will see it and there
won't be any Russian demand, low
guy Lia Nicola.
For what will be my return of
investment ROI?
Is it happening every day? No,
only on Saturday, Sunday.
When you don't have to defend,
it will happen.
Why? Because customer flow down
is huge. Many, many, many
customers visit the malls on
weekends.
Yeah.
If you are joining the aviation
industry or Olav, where you must
have seen.
I got a ticket book curtail. I
got up need in Germany ticket
book here little they are going
to charge you hardly 3000 for
airway ticket.
No, for tomorrow. They know the
number of arrivals.
Not high.
The serving.
Easy to have you serve flight
bucket, so whatever price I'm
going to demand.
OK, singer is going to fulfill.
I've passenger is going to
fulfill my demand. That's the
result. If you see the last
minute, last minute ticket
charges. So the hand.
Does that more than 80,000,
eighteen thousand, 25,000?
Right. Because they know it's 10
customer arrives.
And if.
My survey is only one I'm I'm
having only one server to offer.
That means customer can pay me
any price to fly, say from
Mumbai to Delhi.
He's having emergency. He didn't
have any three plan.
Yeah, we planning what I do.
Emergency. OK.
Jimmy, what is your table?
That a lot of people in the
market were sitting just to take
advantage of your.
If you travel.
With auto or Ola where in the
midnight time towards airport.
You all must be staying in
Mumbai only so Mumbai airport if
you travel in the midnight.
Once they enter into the
airport, they have to pay some
100 or ₹200 bill.
Through that.
The toll kind of thing, I say it
Bari.
It's like OK, but like a lot of
that.
And if you enter just to drop a
passenger, and if you want to
come out of it, then you have to
pay some toll ₹100 there, which
₹150 toll and.
But we'll over one.
Where put me this thing.
Augustinian they give the
reasons to.
Management.
We're kind of reasons they give.
He.
But not too many even do the
customer. What kind of reasons
they give to the customer, he.
How many air? Put me gusni ₹100
charge so.
You try to observe this pattern.
This auto guy especially.
Auto guy, if you ask him to drop
you till airport once they enter
into the airport, they have to
pay this ₹100 charges to airport
authority.
So they will say to the customer
care Amrita gas Katama, who is
it? Upper like you know, there
is a bridge. There is a kind of
overbridge where you have to
take your outlook and you have
to drop your passenger and then
you have to come down.
But they wouldn't take that auto
to upstairs. Why they are going
to deny they're going to deny
that fact. So I want to enter
that. So similar, if you are
going to take this all
conditions in mind that.
There are servers who is going
to deny there are servers who
are going to assist, so I'm
going to put up a 50 counters in
airline or 50 counters in
Denmark. Or like you know how
many counters I should put up.
Or how many counters I shouldn't
put up?
If this I want to calculate this
then I'm going to use this
queuing theory model.
Bring water.
So.
Let's take one example of L mark
as a single cashier and for the
single cashier I'm going to
like, you know, and there
shouldn't be huge queue.
There shouldn't be huge queue,
So what I'm going to put I'm
going to put all the 10 counters
open.
No, my customer arrive at a rate
of 20 customers per hour. So
what will be Lambda here?
Arrival, arrival, arrival a A
means Lambda.
Applying it.
20 customers per hour.
So the unit here is.
Are.
Let's identify the unit first
unit here. We're talking
everything in R and we are going
to solve this example in R.
Not in minutes.
You're not responding. I don't
know whether you're getting what
I'm trying to teach you or not.
Arrival Lambda.
20.
And how much they are serving
MU.
24 per hour.
So my unit is matching are.
From my menu is.
24.
Lambda JC up questions Coperto
take down Lambda and take down
U.
Arrival Chai or service the
time.
No.
It's kinda immediately
utilization factor mikkalo row,
yeah R.
Will Kya hai Lambda YMU?
Lambda by MU so Lambda by me
with now yeah.
Doing Ty 24.
21.
24.
Zero point.
833 This is going to be my
utilization factor.
Yeah, it's 6 minutes remaining.
I need to wrap up by 3:30.
Yeah, I got a hard stop at 3:30.
So yeah, that's, of course,
ANUJA. Everyone understood here,
utilization factor.
Lambda by MU.
So .833 times, I'm going to be
busy.
.833 eighths my utilization
rate?
What is my utilization factor
here? My utilization factor here
is 0.8.
ME3.
I'm going to be busy. My counter
is going to be busy. So what is
the question here? Question is,
Helmert has a single cashier,
means a single counter during
the peak hours, customer arrives
at the rate of 20 customers per
hour.
In one hour I'm getting 20
customer. The average number of
customers that can be processed
by the cashier is 24 per hour.
Took 24 head tougher, 24 by 24
or MATLAB.
Ohh girl.
See.
By this problem, if you go.
You go this vipin our problem.
How many customers I can serve?
24 So if 24 customers come?
What will be my utilization
factor 24 / 24?
100% uh. I'm going to utilize,
right?
Because I can serve 24 customer
per hour and in one hour 24
customers come. So I have
utilized that fully utilized. I
don't have any other time like I
don't have time to drink. I
don't have to.
You are time to close for the
tally or to go for a washroom,
100% utilization. So we are
calculating the utilization
here.
Yeah, we are calculating the
utilization here. So how how I'm
going to calculate utilization?
I'm going to calculate
utilization, arrival arrival is
what a A is what.
He is Lambda.
And service service time is new.
New is what? How many customers
I'm serving 24.
How many customers are arriving
20?
So this is my utilization factor
20 by 24 and it is 0.833.
And this I'm going to be busy
for 0.83 three 80% of time. What
is the probability that I'm
going to stay idle idle? I'm the
this is going to go with the
Formula 1 -, R what is the RR
0.33 and utilization factor? Is
RR 0.33 so 1 -, R what is the
one minute?
Did 117.
1 -, 0 point.
OK 3301160.
Yeah. So this is my ideal time.
Still here, everyone understood.
Everyone got till here.
So.
Just write this down.
And tomorrow we will solve some
more problems.
Your question paper will have.
In 10 months got 2 problems. I
don't want you to lose any.
Mocking this.
One question of 10 marks you
will get two question. I want 20
out of 20 marks.
Who's scoring?
Simple device division. You
won't you. You don't even
require calculator for this.
20 out of 20 is moving 9.
Or 20 bucks ticket office mini
calla. You will be fast.
No.
So the probability.
Is are.
Or it's denied with.
Rosie.
R 1 -, R.
The average number of customers
in a queue, which is called as
LS.
The average time whenever time
comes now you have to write W.
Whenever system comes, you have
to write.
The average number of customers
in a queue.
Number number of customers queue
kissy form would like customer
Siri.
We have seen this as a queue.
The customers line.
So what is the number when we
measure Q?
We are three Kitna Lambak you.
Hey, when you go to Doctor.
Let QA measurement care how many
patients are there in like you
ask, right?
How long is the queue or how
many patients are there so she
will say down 25. Your number is
26.
So whenever number will come.
You are majoring L.
They're measuring.
And.
And Q whenever Q comes right Q.
And whenever IT system then yes.
Are you asking you doctor
Khandare kidneys and better
Doctor Kidney agent for under
treat? Correct. Do you ask that?
No, but you you guess you went
for some physiotherapy session.
For physiotherapy station for
one patient, he will take uh, he
he he takes one hour. Then you
ask, under kidnap patient day
they will say a checkup. Where
bigger. Yeah. Do you see how big
or in hotel you say?
I tell you customer via again,
now they are going to order.
They are going to eat once they
eat.
Like you must have observed this
pattern right when you go, they
will say waiting with my
waiting, Sir. Immediate number
waiting. 8:00 AM there. After
waiting, waiting me for.
Undervalued.
Uncertains, it's attainable. Say
all customers, all customers,
are sitting on those 10 tables.
But.
In what stage they are? Have
they ordered the food? Have they
ate food? Have they finished
food?
After finishing food, are they
going to order dessert as well?
Yes, of Christians satrina.
They time you are talking about
system. The people who are
already getting so.
Then Ellis.
And the average time a customer
spends in the queue for the
service time whenever again time
comes W.
WQ.
So these are the.
Christians are going to get
asked ABC DE Henna. Yeah, very
hope.
Either a will vary or we will
vary. C will very, very, very
Jadhav question.
Tapu condition DANGE arrive at
trip.
And the serving or process at
rate?
Edu variable mile populist music
Mr variable.
So P0 here.
Al Qaida WSLS RW.
I hope you understood and.
Say yes, or if you have any
question put in the chat.
We're going to meet at 9.
Aim tomorrow and.
I hope actually. Generally I
teach. It's my first lecture
with your batch or with your
college. So I don't know what
pattern your teachers are
following, but I.
Need a lot of answers from
students. This is what pattern I
follow. So make sure tomorrow
you sit with the this.
Our mentality or be prepared to
give me answer, be prepared to
reciprocate.
The whatever thing I'm asking, I
at least say yes. No, that's so
that I will understand so that I
don't have to repeat the thing
once I know that you have
understood the concept, I will
go fast.
Yeah.
To try to answer.
OK.
So thank you students. Thanks.
Uninstall. Are you there?
Yesterday. Yes, Sir. I'm there.
But, Sir, I will call you in the
Uh-huh. Yes.
evening, but tomorrow we will
schedule a lecture from 9 to 11,
Yes.
Sir. Is that OK, Sir? For you.
9 to 11 is OK, I'm thinking. See
if students will respond me if
In.
they're getting what I'm
teaching, I will try to cover
fast. Whatever I've like, you
know, 30 minutes I've lost
Ohh.
today. I will try to like, you
know, make up that tomorrow.
Correct, correct. Sahane means 9
to 1111. Thirty like that Sir.
Ah, yes, yes, yes, yes.
So, OK, so Sir, I will call you
in the evening, Sir.
Yeah. OK.
Sure, sure. Sure. Thank you.
Thanks. Thanks. Thanks.
OK. Thank you very much, Sir.
Thank you, student. Bye. See you
tomorrow.